:Info: A map manager API for 3D mapping, navigation and scene interpretation
:Author: Stéphane Magnenat <stephane at magnenat dot net>
:Date: 2013-02-20

=======================================================================
 A map manager API for 3D mapping, navigation and scene interpretation
=======================================================================

Rationale
=========

A modern autonomous robotic system is composed of many software building blocks (SLAM, path planning, scene interpretation), most of them depending on some form of localisation and mapping.
Therefore, there is a need for an API that allows these different elements to communicate, with as little interdependency as possible.
This document describes such an API, based on the concept of a transactional map database.
It aims at being as generic as possible and agnostic with respect to the implementation framework.
It is designed to allow for a fully distributed back-end, while abstracting it in such a way that API users do not need to care about the back-end.

Framework requirements
======================

The implementation framework shall allow modularity based on the concept of components.
It shall provide both message passing (called *message* in the rest of this document) and remote procedure invocation (called *RPC* in the rest of this document) for interfacing modules together.

Writing conventions
===================

When variables are described, the convention ``variable: Type`` is used, with ``variable`` having its first letter in lower case and ``Type`` in upper case, and using *CamelCase* for multiple words.

When RPC or messages are described, the convention ``name(arguments) -> ReturnType`` is used, in CamelCase as well.

Concepts
========

Frame
  A frame is a coordinate frame located in 3-D space, linked with other frames through a set of probabilistic transformations.
  Frames have unique identifiers, and can optionally have human-readable names.
  Frames can hold arbitrary data.
Link
  A probabilistic transformation between two frames, with a type and a time stamp.
  Several links are allowed between the same two frames, provided they are of different types.
  Links can hold arbitrary data.
EstimatedFrame
  A graph of frames can be relaxed to have non-probabilistic poses.
  Several strategy can be provided by the implementation that will lead to different relaxed values.
Transaction
  All map queries (excepted trigger bookkeeping) must be performed in a transaction, during which the world is assured to be consistent when viewed from the client.
  A transaction might fail in case of write conflict.
  The suggested paradigm for implementating transactions is *multiversion concurrency control*.
Trigger
  Clients can create triggers to watch part of the database and be notified of changes asynchronously.

Data types used in interfaces
=============================

``TransactionId``
  The unique identifier of a transaction, a ``Uint64``.
``TimeStamp``
  A high-precision time stamp, a tuple ``(Int64, Int32)`` in which the first element represents the number of seconds since 1 January 1970, not counting leap seconds (POSIX time), and the second element in the nano-second sub-precision.
``FrameId``
  The unique identifier of a frame, a 32-byte identifier.
  In a distributed system, the first 16 bytes shall identify the host (for instance holding an IPv6 address), in a centralised system, these can be 0.
  The last 16 bytes shall implement an identifier that is unique on this host, for instance an ever-increasing number.
  The identifier space generated by 16 bytes is large enough such the host will never produce the same number twice during its life time.
``FrameIds``
  A list of ``FrameId``.
``FrameName``
  A human-readable text naming important frames, like "world", a ``String``.
``Transform``
  A non-probabilistic 3-D transformation, in SO(3), implemented as a 4x4 matrix of ``Float64``.
``EstimatedFrame``
  A tuple ``(id: FrameId, transform: Transform)`` representing a frame with coordinates estimated with respect to another frame.
``EstimatedFrames``
  A list of ``EstimatedFrame``.
``ProbTransform``
  A probabilistic 3-D transformation.
  
  **SM: What is this encoding?**
  **PTF: I know what encoding I like. It is different than the encoding suggested for ROS. Whatever we pick, it should be clearly documented (mathematically) with a little library attached. My implementation is here https://github.com/furgalep/Schweizer-Messer/tree/master/sm_kinematics but it probably needs some more editing and documentation.**
``LinkType``
  A type of link, a ``String``.
  This allows multiple links of different types between two frames.
``LinkId``
  A tuple ``(frame0: FrameId, frame1: FrameId, type: LinkType, time: TimeStamp)``.
  This uniquely identifies a link.
  The map manager cannot hold two ``LinkId``s with similar ``type`` and ``time``, and similar but inverted frames ``frame0`` and ``frame1``.
``LinkIds``
  A list of ``LinkId``.
``Link``
  A tuple ``(link: LinkId, transformation: ProbTransform, confidence: Float64)``, in which ``confidence`` expresses how much the link creator was confident that this link actually exists. This is not the same information as ``transformation``, which expresses a probabilistic transformation from ``link.frame1`` to ``link.frame0``, assuming that the link exists.
``Links``
  A list of ``Link``.
``DataType``
  A type of data to be attached to a frame, a ``String``.
``DataTypes``
  A list of ``DataType``.
``DataBlob``
  Opaque binary data.
``Data``
  Data with type as a tuple ``(type: DataType, value: DataBlob)``
``FrameDataSet``
  A (multi)map of ``FrameId -> Data``.
``LinkDataSet``
  A (multi)map of ``LinkIds -> Data``.
``Box``
  A three-dimensional box in space defined by its two opposite corners, hence a pair of tuples ``((xmin: Float64, ymin: Float64, zmin: Float64), (xmax: Float64, ymax: Float64, zmax: Float64))``.
``EstimationStrategy``
  The estimation strategy to use to estimate non-probabilistic frames, a ``String``.
``TriggerId``
  Trigger identifier; because it refers to the transport mechanism and not to the database scheme, its type is implementation-dependent.
``TriggerIds``
  A list of ``TriggerId``.
  
Map queries (RPC)
=================

Transaction
-----------

``startTransaction() -> TransactionId``
  Create a new transaction and return its identifier.
``commitTransaction(transaction: TransactionId) -> (Bool, String)``
  Attempt to commit a transaction, return whether it succeeded or failed, and the message.
  Read-only transactions always succeed.
  Transactions involving write might fail if there is a write conflict.
  The granularity of their detection depends on the implementation.
``abortTransaction(transaction: TransactionId, reason: String)``
  Abort a transaction, giving a reason for server logs.
  
All further messages in this section are assumed to take a ``TransactionId`` as first parameter.
For clarity, these are not written explicitely in the following RPC signatures.

Relaxation
----------

``estimateFrames(origin: FrameId, strategy: EstimationStrategy = "") -> EstimatedFrames``
  Return all frames linked to ``origin`` using a given ``strategy``, if none given, use the default provided by the implementation.
  Their coordinates are relative to ``origin``, which therefore is identity.
  If the implementation does not provide ``strategy``, it is allowed to use its default one.
``estimateFramesWithinBox(origin: FrameId, box: Box, strategy: EstimationStrategy = "") -> EstimatedFrames``
  Return all frames linked to ``origin`` within ``box`` (relative to ``origin``) using a given ``strategy``, if none given, use the default provided by the implementation.
  Their coordinates are relative to ``origin``, which therefore is identity.
  If part of the pose graph is within the box, but the part connecting it to ``origin`` is outside of the box, the inclusion of this part is left to the implementation.
  If the implementation does not provide ``strategy``, it is allowed to use its default one.
``estimateFramesWithinSphere(origin: FrameId, radius: Float64, strategy: EstimationStrategy = "") -> EstimatedFrames``
  Return all frames linked to ``origin`` within ``radius`` (centered on ``origin``) using a given ``strategy``, if none given, use the default provided by the implementation.
  Their coordinates are relative to ``origin``, which therefore is identity.
  If the implementation does not provide ``strategy``, it is allowed to use its default one.
``estimateNeighboringFrames(origin: FrameId, linkDist: Uint64, radius: Float64, strategy: EstimationStrategy = "") -> EstimatedFrames``
  Return frames linked to ``origin`` within ``radius`` (centered on ``origin``) and at maximum ``linkDist`` number of links, using a given ``strategy``, if none given, use the default provided by the implementation.
  Their coordinates are relative to ``origin``, which therefore is identity.
  If the implementation does not provide ``strategy``, it is allowed to use its default one.

Data access
-----------
  
``getFrameData(frames: FrameIds, types: DataTypes) -> FrameDataSet``
  Return all data of ``types`` contained in ``frames``.
``getLinkData(links: LinkIds, types: DataTypes) -> LinkDataSet``
  Return all data of ``types`` contained in ``links``.
``getLinks(links: LinkIds) -> Links``
  Return requested links, if they exist.
  In ``LinkId`` in ``links``, also consider permuted frame identifiers.
``getFrameLinks(frame: FrameId) -> Links``
  Return all links touching frame.
``getFrameName(frame: FrameId) -> String``
  Get the human-readable name of a frame.

Setters
-------

``setLink(frame0: FrameId, frame1: FrameId, transform: ProbTransform, confidence: Float64, edgeType: UInt64 )``
  Set a link between two frames, if the link (or its reverse) exists, its transform and confidence are replaced.
``deleteLink(frame0: FrameId, frame1: FrameId, type: LinkType)``
  Remove the link (or its reverse) of a given type between two frames.
  This removes this link for all time stamps, and deletes all data associated with this link.
``setFrameData(frame: FrameId, Data: data)``
  Set data for ``frame``, if ``data.type`` already exists, the corresponding data are overwritten.
``setLinkData(link: LinkId, Data: data)``
  Set data for ``link``, if ``data.type`` already exists, the corresponding data are overwritten.
``deleteFrameData(frame: FrameId, type: DataType)``
  Delete data of a give type in a given frame.
``deleteLinkData(link: LinkId, type: DataType)``
  Delete data of a give type in a given link.
``createFrame() -> FrameId``
  Create and return a new FrameId, which is guaranteed to be unique.
``setFrameName(frame: FrameId, name: String)``
  Set the human-readable name of a frame.
``deleteFrame(frame: FrameId)``
  Delete a frame, all its links and all its data.

  
Triggers (messages)
===================

Available types
---------------

``linksChanged(added: Links, removed: Links)``
  Links have been added to or removed from a set of watched frames.
``framesMoved(frames: FrameIds, origin: FrameId)``
  A set of frames have been moved with respect to ``origin``.
``frameDataChanged(frames: FrameIds, type: DataType)``
  Data have been changed for a set of watched frames and a data type.
``linkDataChanged(links: LinkIds, type: DataType)``
  Data have been changed for a set of watched links and a data type.

  
Trigger setters
---------------

These trigger-bookkeeping queries do not operate within transactions and might fail, by returning invalid trigger identifiers.

``watchLinks(frames: FrameIds, existingTrigger = null: TriggerId) -> TriggerId``
  Watch a set of frames for link changes, return the trigger identifier.
  Optionally reuse an existing trigger of the same type.
  All frames must exist, otherwise this query fails.
``watchEstimatedTransforms(frames: FrameIds, origin: FrameId, epsilon: (Float64, Float64), existingTrigger = null: TriggerId) -> TriggetId``
  Watch a set of frames for estimated pose changes with respect to origin.
  Set the threshold in (translation, rotation) below which no notification occurs.
  All frames must exist and have a link to origin, otherwise this query fails.
``watchFrameData(frames: FrameIds, type: DataType, existingTrigger = null: TriggerId) -> TriggerId``
  Watch a set of frames for data changes, return the trigger identifier.
  Optionally reuse an existing trigger of the same type.
  All frames must exist, otherwise this query fails.
``watchLinkData(links: LinkIds, type: DataType, existingTrigger = null: TriggerId) -> TriggerId``
  Watch a set of links for data changes, return the trigger identifier.
  Optionally reuse an existing trigger of the same type.
  All frames must exist, otherwise this query fails.
``deleteTriggers(triggers: TriggerIds)``
  Delete triggers if they exist.
  
